Facial Expression Recognizer Workshop Submission (#1479)
hackclub/hackclub: workshops/facial_expression_recognizer/README.md

![disgust image](https://cloud-kmaqeh4qc.vercel.app/disgust1.gif)

Here's the [**demo**](https://repl.it/@YashKalbande/facialexpressionrecongnizer#main.py) of what we'll be making. You can see both the final code and test it out on this Repl environment.

![Final Code Output](https://cloud-ki1smi0m8.vercel.app/0finaloutput-min.gif)

In this workshop, I'll share how to build a Facial Expression Recognizer using the `FER` library from python.

## FER Library
Facial Expression Recognition Library is developed by [`Justin Shenk`](https://pypi.org/user/jshenk). This Library requires `OpenCV>=3.2` and `Tensorflow>=1.7.0` dependencies installed in the system. Faces are detected using OpenCV's Haar Cascade classifier. For more information and the Source code of FER Library, you can visit [FER's GitHub page here.](https://github.com/justinshenk/fer)

## Setting up our code!

For this workshop, we're going to be using an online code editor called [Repl.it](https://repl.it/site/about), or you can use your favorite code editor. It can be installed through pip:`$ pip install fer`. If you can using Repl so just import the `FER` library and it will be installed with all its dependencies.

> 1. Head over to [Repl.it/languages/Python3](https://repl.it/languages/python3)

Reviewer: Add a NOTE somewhere here saying the readers to make sure they are using python 3 and above. I tried doing the workshop in python 2 and was confused because I didn't know about this.

   * This will create a new [Python 3](https://www.w3schools.com/python/) Repl for you to use to code.
2. Edit your new `main.py` file with the following code:

```python
import cv2
from fer import FER
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.image as mpimg
```
- The code above says that:

>   * Import complete `cv2` commonly known as Open CV library. It provides us various computer vision solutions. We will use this library mainly for reading and manipulating images. You can read more about `Open Cv library` [on the OpenCV Docs](https://opencv.org/about/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Import complete `cv2` commonly known as Open CV library. It provides us various computer vision solutions. We will use this library mainly for reading and manipulating images. You can read more about `Open Cv library` [on the OpenCV Docs](https://opencv.org/about/).
```

  * Import `FER` function from `fer` library. This is the main library we will be using in this workshop.
  * Add `matplotlib.pyplot` module as `plt`. It will help us to plot graphs 

>   * Include `matplotlib.image` module as `mpimg` .The matplotlib Library's [matplotlib.image](https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/introductory/images.html) is used to plot image on the graph with `x` and `y` axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Include `matplotlib.image` module as `mpimg` .The matplotlib Library's [`matplotlib.image`](https://matplotlib.org/tutorials/introductory/images.html) is used to plot image on the graph with `x` and `y` axis.
```

  
  3. Next, we'll predict emotions of Still Images:
  
```python
image = cv2.imread("abc.jpg")
detector = FER()
print(detector.detect_emotions(image))
```
- Give a try to understand what the code above is trying to say. Here is the explanation of the above code:
  * Our `image` variable loads an image from specified file in our case `abc.jpg` by using `cv2.imread("abc.jpg")`method. 

>   * Next we will assign `FER()` which was imported earlier to the **detector** variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Next we will assign `FER()` which was imported earlier to the **`detector`** variable.
```

  * print syntax with `detector.detect_emotions(image)` as parameter will returns dictionary of bounding box notations.
Below is Sample Output:
```python
[{'box': [277, 90, 48, 63], 'emotions': {'angry': 0.02, 'disgust': 0.0, 'fear': 0.05, 'happy': 0.16, 'neutral': 0.09, 'sad': 0.27, 'surprise': 0.41}]
```
**NOTE** If you want to add an image in `repl.it` IDE refer to the below Video:

![Upload Image Guide](https://cloud-3jh0ilrgt.vercel.app/0uploadimage.gif)

## What is going on underhood🤔🤔

> The `detector` is the main part of our workshop. Let's see what the detector do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `detector` is the main part of our workshop. Let's see what the detector does:

```

> A detector is an object created to store `FER()`. Detector returns an Ordered Dictionary of Bounding Box Notations. It observes and detects where the face is situated, classifies, and rates its probability with decimal values from `0` to `1` for all 6 emotions respectively. FER exhibit Keras model built with CNN or well know as Convolutional Neural Networks. It stores the values in the `HDF5` model. FER by default detect faces using OpenCV's  Haar Cascade Classifier. Alternatively, we can use a more advanced Multi-Cascade Convolutional Network in short `MTCNN`. It will use Peltarion API in the backend in place of the Keras model. By default FER uses CNN but if want to use advanced MTCNN just pass `mtcnn=True` in FER parentheses just like `detector = FER(mtcnn=True)`. for further use we will use the MTCNN model for more accurate results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A detector is an object created to store `FER()`. Detector returns an Ordered Dictionary of Bounding Box Notations. It observes and detects where the face is situated, classifies, and rates its probability with decimal values from `0` to `1` for all 6 emotions respectively. FER exhibit Keras model built with CNN or well know as Convolutional Neural Networks. It stores the values in the `HDF5` model. FER by default detect faces using OpenCV's  Haar Cascade Classifier. Alternatively, we can use a more advanced Multi-Cascade Convolutional Network in short `MTCNN`. It will use Peltarion API in the backend in place of the Keras model. By default FER uses CNN but if want to use advanced MTCNN just pass `mtcnn=True` in FER parentheses just like `detector = FER(mtcnn=True)`. From now on, we will use the MTCNN model for more accurate results.
```

## Data is the new oil!

> Data is known as the new oil of the Twenty-First Century. We can do different things with data generated above which we will discuss in the `Hacking Section` at last so stay tuned. We will store the emotion and detected face. Then display bounding yellow box around face detected and scores below it. Let's see below how we can do this.

Reviewer: Here you have written "we will store the emotion and the detected face" can u please specify "where?" so it will be something like "we will store the emotion and the detected face in the ____ variable"

```python 
import cv2
from fer import FER
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.image as mpimg

image = cv2.imread("abc.jpg")

> detector = FER(mtcnn=True)

Reviewer: you can add a "NOTE:" below the code that we have changed the python code to use mtcnn now. As it was different before.

```

> Until now we have reached till here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: this line is grammatically incorrect. so u can just remove it as it isn't much necessary there.

Next, we will declare a new variable `result` and store our output in form of a separate array.
```python
result = detector.detect_emotions(image)
```
### Now it is time to Highlight Yellow Bounding Box around face:
```python
bounding_box = result[0]["box"]
emotions = result[0]["emotions"]
cv2.rectangle(image,(bounding_box[0], bounding_box[1]),(bounding_box[0] + bounding_box[2], bounding_box[1] + bounding_box[3]),(0, 155, 255), 2,)
```
Explanation of the above code is:

>   * `bounding_box` variable will store bounding box coordinates that were generated and stored in the `result` variable. It will access and start storing from its `Zeroth`elemets (or the first element in common language) of `" box"` key. If you print this variable you will get output something like this `(298, 361, 825, 825)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `bounding_box` variable will store the bounding box coordinates that were generated and stored in the `result` variable. It will start storing from its `0th`element (or the first element in common language) of the `"box"` key. If you print this variable you will get an output something like this `(298, 361, 825, 825)`.
```

>   * Same with `emotions` variable it will access `result` and start storing from it's `0th` element of `"emotions"` key. If you print, you will get output as `{'angry': 0.08, 'disgust': 0.03, 'fear': 0.05, 'happy': 0.09, 'sad': 0.35, 'surprise': 0.0, 'neutral': 0.38}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Similary, the `emotions` variable too will access the `result` variable and start storing from it's `0th` element of the `"emotions"` key. If you print this, you will get an output as `{'angry': 0.08, 'disgust': 0.03, 'fear': 0.05, 'happy': 0.09, 'sad': 0.35, 'surprise': 0.0, 'neutral': 0.38}`
```

  * `cv2.rectangle()` method is used to draw a rectangle around detected face.It has `image, start_point, end_point, color, thickness` as its parameters.
    * In our case we have used `image` as parameter for `image` to specify the image we are going to use. `start_point` as `(bounding_box[0], bounding_box[1])` where `bounding_box[0]` is X coordinate and `bounding_box[1]` is Y coordinate of start point.

>     * Next `end_point` as `(bounding_box[0] + bounding_box[2], bounding_box[1] + bounding_box[3])` where `bounding_box[0] + bounding_box[2]` is X coordinate and `bounding_box[1] + bounding_box[3]` is Y coordinate of end point.

Reviewer: Grammar framing is a bit off. Try to reframe this sentence.

    * `(0, 155, 255)` is the yellow color we are going to use as a box color.
    * `thickness` is given as `2`. To define the thickness of 2px to box.
    
### Add Score to Bounding Box

Now we will add Score to Bounding Box by using following code:

```python

> emotion_name, score = detector.top_emotion(image )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
emotion_name, score = detector.top_emotion(image)
```

for index, (emotion_name, score) in enumerate(emotions.items()): 
    color = (211, 211, 211) if score < 0.01 else (255, 0, 0)
    emotion_score = "{}: {}".format(
          emotion_name, "{:.2f}".format(score))
    cv2.putText(image,emotion_score,
            (bounding_box[0], bounding_box[1] + bounding_box[3] + 30 + index * 15),cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX,0.5,color,1,cv2.LINE_AA,)
cv2.imwrite("emotion.jpg", image)
```
The above code says:
  * Store the top emotion values in `emotion_name,score` variable by using `detector.top_emotion(img)` method.

>   * We will iterate over the index and value of an item in a list by using a basic `for` loop and `enumerate` method. So now 1 emotion is iterated at a given time. This process takes place 6 times as we have 6 emotions to test. You can read [docs here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#enumerate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * We will iterate over the index and value of an item in a list by using a basic `for` loop and `enumerate` method. So now a single emotion is iterated each time. This process takes place 6 times as we have 6 emotions to test.
  
 You can read more about this in the [docs here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#enumerate).
```

>     * Colors are assigned to the `color` variable based upon scores. The shorthand of the **IF & Else** statement is used for a better understanding of code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Colors are assigned to the `color` variable based upon scores. The shorthand of the **`if-else`** statement is used for a better understanding of code.
```

    * `emotion_score` variable stores the emotion score and will be used to print it.

>     * `cv2.putText()` method is used to draw a text string on any image. You can read more about the method and its parameter in [docs here](https://docs.opencv.org/master/d6/d6e/group__imgproc__draw.html#ga5126f47f883d730f633d74f07456c576)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `cv2.putText()` method is used to draw a text string on any image. 
    
You can read more about this method and its parameter in the [docs here](https://docs.opencv.org/master/d6/d6e/group__imgproc__draw.html#ga5126f47f883d730f633d74f07456c576).
```

>   * Outside of for loop `cv2.imwrite()`method will create and save new final output image of name `"emotion.jpg"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Outside the `for` loop `cv2.imwrite()`method will create and save new final output image of name `"emotion.jpg"`.
```

  
### Display Output Image

```python
img = mpimg.imread('emotion.jpg')
imgplot = plt.imshow(img)
plt.show()
```

> We at the final step of the workshop. Where we display output image by using matplotlib Library functions.`mpimg.imread('emotion.jpg')` method read the image provided in parentheses. Store the image image in `imgplot` by using `plt.imshow(img)`. And Finally `plt.show()` will display our output image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We at the final step of the workshop. Where we display the output image by using `matplotlib`'s library functions.

`mpimg.imread('emotion.jpg')` method reads the image provided in the parentheses. Then, we will store the image in the `imgplot` variable by using `plt.imshow(img)`. And Finally `plt.show()` will display our output image.
```

> ![dispaly emotion.jpg image](https://cloud-9v4qr2s03.vercel.app/0emotion.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![display emotion.jpg image](https://cloud-9v4qr2s03.vercel.app/0emotion.jpg)
```

**Congrats! You've just made your Facial Expression Recognizer! 🎉**
  
# Future Hacking

> Our Facial Expression Recognizer is just the starting point for new and innovative FER systems. The time has come where you can build something new by what you have learned until now. Here are some of my ideas which you can try:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our Facial Expression Recognizer is just the starting point for new and innovative FER systems. It is now time for you to build something new by what you have learned until now.

Here are some ideas which I suggest you to try out:
```

> 1. We have build FER for still images. You can try FER for video analysis of facial emotions present in the video. Here is a link to [demo and code](https://repl.it/@YashKalbande/fervideo#main.py). The detector returns a list of JSON objects. Each JSON object contains two keys: 'box' and 'emotions'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We have build FER for still images. You can try FER for video analysis of facial emotions present in the video. Here is a link to [demo and code](https://repl.it/@YashKalbande/fervideo#main.py). The detector returns a list of JSON objects. Each JSON object contains two keys: '`box`' and '`emotions`'.
```

2. Creating a real-time Facial Expression Recognizer using a Live Camera will be a very exciting thing to try.

> 3. You can create a different recommendation system based upon the emotion of Humans by extracting and manipulating data from the `result` variable. Like recommending fun books, videos, gifs, etc to the person who has sad emotion or motivation books, videos for the person in fear or anger. It is up to you how you make it in your style and creativity. Happy Hacking!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. You can create a recommendation system based upon the emotions of people by extracting and manipulating data from the `result` variable. And then recommending fun books, videos, gifs, etc. to people who have a sad emotion or motivational books and videos for people in fear or anger. It is up to you how you make it in your style and creativity.

Happy Hacking!
```
